>> My name's Hannah Dahlen
and I'm Associate Professor
of Midwifery at the
University of Western Sydney,
and I'm also the National Media
Spokesperson for the Australian
College of Midwives.
And I did my midwifery
training in the UK,
and I came back to
Australia and embarked
on a 20-year career in big, busy
tertiary referral hospitals,
mostly in delivery ward.
And in the last couple
of years, I've really
moved into academia, into
research and teaching,
but I've missed women
so much that I've now
gone into private practice
as well as my other role
and done a complete U-turn,
and I've actually gone back
into the majority of the women
I care for having home births,
which is lovely.
We definitely have rising
fear around childbirth,
and there's plenty of
research to show that.
There's also research
to show the more
intervention there
is in childbirth,
the more fear there is.
So we often blame women and
we say women are more fearful,
but I think it's actually time
to look at the health providers
and how we're generating
fear, and the language
we use with women,
the environments
that we provide care in can
all generate enormous fear.
If you look at how a midwife
will present statistics
to how an obstetrician will,
midwives very much talk about--
you know, if you're
talking about one in 1,000,
obstetrician will say, one in
1,000 chance your baby dies,
all as a woman you hear is
I'm the one, whereas a midwife
takes the attitude of,
well, 999 times out of 1,000
nothing's going to happen.
So same statistics-- very,
very different impact
at where you put your emphasis.
We have a very limited view
about safety in maternity care.
Essentially, it's live
baby and live mother.
Now, of course,
those are ultimately
the most important thing.
But they're not the only thing.
And when we focus
so much on what
I call the tip of the
iceberg in this situation,
we actually often ignore
great underlying dangers
that we don't address.
For example, cultural
safety, emotional safety,
psychological, spiritual
safety are not addressed.
We know that postpartum
depression is rising.
We know that suicide
is one of the leading
causes of maternal
death in this country.
That's not safe care.
That is a very big
worry that we are
creating a society
that's actually
increasing women's distress.
These women are also becoming
the mothers of the future,
and they are
mothering children who
are more likely
to be traumatized
and are more likely to
end up with our society
not being a better place.
So we've got to take our eyes
off the tip of the iceberg
and start to look
underneath at all
of the other drivers of
morbidity and of well-being
that we are not addressing.
So women are often in situations
where they lack support.
They may have mental illness.
They may have drug use.
And what do we do?
We bring them into
our hospitals.
We check their tummies.
We check their blood pressures.
We check their urine.
We send them home.
We're not actually addressing
the most important aspect here,
which is, what is the
distress going on?
What is the support structure?
How can we put into
place things and people
to make this experience
more pleasant for the woman
and provide her with
support with mothering?
So, in fact, we
address everything
about her physically, and the
greatest issue in the room
is never addressed, and that's
the issue that kills her.
So we have got to, as health
professionals, realize
when we deal with childbirth,
the biggest organ involved
in birth is the brain, and
we so often forget the brain.
One of the key things that makes
birth go well is relationships,
and relationships breed trust,
and where trust is, fear isn't.
It's a simple kind
of correlation.
So with partnerships with
women that midwives form
during continuity of care,
what midwives actually
do is build up an
environment of trust,
build up a partnership where
women's true potential can
come out, where
women can actually
do what they're very
beautifully designed to do,
which is give birth
to their baby.
So all of our research
tells us continuity of care
is a totally magic sort of
supporting structure that
enables birth to function best.
And I've often said, if
pharmaceutical companies could
develop a tablet that
was continuity of care,
they would be
absolute millionaires.
But continuity care is
midwifery, and midwifery sits
within a whole
political agenda that
constantly means that
society battles against that.
Of course, it's not
just about continuity
because you can
have continuity care
from a medical
professional and they
will take a very
medical attitude
and still very much see you as
a belly, a baby, blood pressure,
et cetera.
Continuity care from a midwifery
perspective is a social model,
and that involves, how
are you going as a person?
It involves listening
a lot, talking a lot.
It involves empowering women.
Of course, you can do this.
Your body is
designed to do this.
It involves women
actually helping women
to believe in themselves.
So the approach that midwives
take in continuity of care
is a social model.
The approach often taken in
medical continuity of care
is a medicalized model.
So they are very
different things.
People have this assumption
that birth in a hospital is safe
and it's as safe as it gets.
Now, if you've got a
problem, birth in a hospital
is the best place
to have the birth.
It is definitely safe,
and hospitals are
fantastic when we got issues.
But if you're a low-risk
woman, healthy pregnancy,
you walk into the doors
of our institutions,
what you do is you embark on
a cascade that often takes you
in a direction you
never anticipated.
You arrive.
Midwife puts you on a bed.
She puts a monitor
on your belly.
She examines you.
She takes your blood pressure.
She finds something
going on in the monitor.
There's a deviation
on the trace.
The monitor never comes off.
Now you're really uncomfortable
because you're on the bed.
You need pain relief.
You're going to
have an epidural.
Now you're going to need a drip.
Now you're going
to need a catheter.
Now you're never, ever going
to get off that monitor.
OK, we progress.
You labor slows down.
Now you need oxytocin.
Now you get to second stage.
Guess what?
You can't push because
you can't feel.
So now we get the forceps out.
Now we cut the episiotomy.
Suddenly you've got
a baby in your arms.
Yes, you're alive
and the baby's alive,
but has that been
a good experience,
and did it need to
happen that way?
And our research would tell
us that, no, it didn't.
There were things that happened
at the beginning that took you
down that line,
and we need to stop
funneling women down this
huge cascade of intervention.
Women who choose
home birth often
have a different
philosophical framework
to women who choose
hospital birth.
And we've just finished
a study looking
at the choices around vaginal
birth after cesarean section.
And what became
really clear is women
who chose to have vaginal
birth after cesarean
came from what we called
a mother birth framework.
Their philosophy was
what's good for me
and makes me healthy and
happy is good for my baby
because I will mother better.
The women who chose
repeat cesarean often
came from a childbirth
framework, which
was my job as a good mother
is to sacrifice myself
for my baby.
Society very much
sits on the side
of the childbirth framework
and says good mothers
sacrifice themselves.
Women who say strong
mothers, empowered mothers,
powerful mothers,
and healthy mothers
are good mothers often
shout into this world that
does not understand them.
And yet, it makes such sense.
The hand that rocks the
cradle rules the world.
If that hand is sad, if
that hand is damaged,
then the product that
steps from that cradle
will be damaged and will be
sad and will shape our society
in a different way.
So we have got to get to
grips with the different ways
that we look at childbirth.
At home, it is so
totally different.
I almost can't explain
how different it is.
The environment is the woman's.
Her furniture, her room, her
smells, her food, her partner,
her family, they're all
something familiar with.
At home, we stay
almost under the radar.
We creep quietly in the shadows.
We whisper.
We treat that home almost like
a beautiful cathedral in Europe,
with awe and reverence,
very different to how
it is in hospital.
She is in her own space.
She is relaxed.
She feels loved and comfortable.
Therefore, she does
not release adrenaline.
She releases this wonderful
flow of oxytocin and endorphins.
She is now in the zone, as we
call her, completely blissed
out, getting on with it,
not distressed in labor.
She gives birth.
She pushes that baby out.
That baby is brought up
onto her belly by herself.
That baby is now wide
eyed with catecholamines
racing through its system.
It's so engaged.
It's got dilated pupils.
It's mouthing around.
And the two of them, with
this incredible cocktail
of hormones, are just falling
in love and connected.
There's no, what do I do with
my baby, what do you think,
is everything OK, none of that.
It's just completely
the two of them
in their little world with,
often, their partner there.
So different in hospital
where often there's fear.
There's shouting.
There's screaming.
Babies come out roaring.
I often see at home birth these
babies hardly make a sound.
They cry very, very
softly or they just look.
So the whole kind of pool
of how home birth works
in releasing those hormones,
in stopping the fear,
in making sure that
everything just progresses on
in that amazing
rhythm, completely
different than putting a
woman in a foreign environment
with foreign people,
with strangers, with
smell she doesn't understand,
with bright lights
and banging doors.
At home, because there's
nothing else interrupting--
there's nothing
else interfering.
You haven't got synthetic
hormones going on.
You haven't got
an induced labor.
You haven't got an
epiduralized woman.
What you see is
birth flowing along
in an incredibly natural way.
The moment something goes
wrong or starts to deviate,
it's so obvious that
often what happens
is it's the tiny
ripple in the water
you can see so clearly
because everything's so calm
and in process, that you
actually step in at that point
and you transfer.
So before you end
up with a tsunami,
you've gone in
already because you've
seen the ripple, whereas in
hospital we're chugging along
and the baby's trace is
getting a little bit worse,
but everyone's out there.
I can call them at any moment.
We monitor babies to death.
We often do things
because we know
everyone's out there
that we don't respond.
So I would actually
say home birth is safer
because we respond early
and we can see clearly
when there's a problem.
In hospital, we're doing
so many other things.
We no longer know what's
normal, and sometimes we
don't see when labor
actually deviates
from normal to the abnormal.
I think the fundamental
fact is home
is the safest place to be
when everything's going right.
Hospital is the safest place to
be when things are going wrong.
Therefore, the response
to that shouldn't
be, let's put everybody that's
going right into a hospital
in case something goes
wrong, but it should be let's
set up systems that
are responsive.
Let's make sure our
midwives are skilled.
Let's make sure we
have processes in
to make sure that
women who need help
are in hospital
when they need it
and that women are
not in hospital
if they don't need to
be there because we
are constantly stuffing
normal up that way as well.
It's very clear when it comes
to the home birth debate
that science is politicized, and
that is a real big, big problem
because it's very
hard for consumers
to make any sense
of the statistics,
that professionals seem
to look at one paper
and come out with two
different responses.
So my attitude to this has been
you cannot just talk about home
birth as one group.
You have to divide this up
into three considerations.
The first is, what
are the outcomes
for women who are low risk in
pregnancy and have well babies?
They're fantastic.
Those outcomes
show us that there
are no difference in
outcomes for the baby,
for women who are low
risk in hospital-- mothers
much better outcomes,
much less intervention.
OK, so that's one
group of statistics.
The second group of statistics,
which is often bundled up
with the first, is,
well, what about women
who are moderate or high risk?
Well, we know the
risk is increased.
We know that there
are a greater chance
of babies dying and of
complications for the mother
and baby.
So we know that.
The third consideration, though,
is, OK, regardless of that,
does a woman have
the right to make
a decision about
where she gives birth
and what happens to her body?
The law's on her side in
almost every country on Earth.
So what we erroneously
do in this debate
is bundle them all
up in together.
Look at studies
that have included
both low risk and high risk
and go, the rate of death
is three times as great.
Well, yes, the rate of death
is three times as great
when you include
those high-risk women.
Remove them, look at only
low risk, and, guess what,
it's no different.
So our political agendas allow
us to hand pick the evidence
to support our
political beliefs,
and this is very irresponsible
when we are actually
supposed to be
putting forth balanced
information to consumers.
A study that's
often talked about
by Australian obstetricians
is the Bastian study,
which was undertaken
back in the '80s.
And they looked at all
home births for a period,
and they found an increased
perinatal mortality.
However, there were lots of twin
births, breech births in that.
When they took them out,
there was no difference
between the perinatal mortality
between home and hospital.
However, very irresponsibly,
obstetricians have always
gone on with the statistic.
Well, it's three times as risky.
Since then, we've had very
large home births study
from the Netherlands, over
500,000 women giving birth
there, low-risk
women with midwives--
no difference in perinatal
mortality to giving birth
in hospital.
We've had the Canadian
study showing midwives
caring for women at home and
in hospital-- no difference
in perinatal outcome in
home compared to hospital.
We've had the US study
showing over 5,000 births
at home, low risk--
no difference in
perinatal outcome,
far better outcomes
for mom and baby.
But we've also had
some studies coming out
where they've mixed the risk.
So we've had a study coming
out of the UK, which had
twins and breaches included.
We've had a study coming out
from South Australia that,
again, had high-risk
women involved.
Again, when you remove the
high-risk women and only
looked at the low
risk, no difference.
Add the high risk, yes,
there is increased risk.
This isn't rocket science.
It makes total sense.
If your pregnancy is
normal and low risk,
then home is totally safe.
If there are added
risks, then home
is not often the best
place to be physically.
But some women may
feel mentally at ease.
And then we come to the
third part of the debate--
do women have the
right to make a choice?
It's very clear to
me, evidence is not
going to end this debate,
because, actually, the home
birth debate is about
more than safety.
It's about more than
perinatal mortality.
The home birth debate cuts to
the core of many very, very
deep issues in our society.
It's about women's agency
and right to choose.
It's about midwifery autonomy.
It's about trust in birth.
It's about belief in
maximization of physiology.
And it's about the absence
of the obstetric gaze.
Get down to the bottom
line, and home birth
threatens all of our
deeply held beliefs
around this in childbirth.
So evidence is not
going to end the debate.
One way to possibly
end the debate--
and it's something that I've
been writing about recently--
is to get
collaboration happening
between the different
groups-- that
is, the obstetricians, the
midwives, and the consumers.
And we all have to hold
each other accountable
for coming out with
evidence-based guidelines that
balance the evidence
and make sure that we
present all sides of it.
Now, the UK's done this
enormously successful
and come out with a home birth
position statement that says,
home birth for low-risk women
is great and has benefits.
Now, the only way they ever
could get to that position
is to have obstetricians,
midwives, and consumers
at the table.
Every other major medical
and midwifery organization
in the world has got their
separate statements standing
on either side of the fence
shouting at each other.
So I actually believe
collaboration and consensus
statement is the
way we need to head
to get past of
what is essentially
a belief polarization in this.
I've often said
that there's been
an eerie silence
from the feminists
on the issue of
childbirth and women's
rights around childbirth.
And I think that stems
from this concern
that if we associate
women with birth,
we pull them back
to the home, we
pull them back out of all of the
advancements that we've made.
And I think that's
a very sad comment
because never before
in history have we
been able to have it all.
And yet, there's an
aspect of our lives
that is being
destroyed every day
and is not allowing us to become
the very strong women that we
could be.
We can be strong mothers.
We can be strong business women.
We can be strong wives.
We can be strong
in so many areas.
So feminism, I
think, has got a lot
to answer for because
they have been
terribly silent on childbirth,
and it's time to wake up.
And I actually think there is
a rising awareness that this
is a huge not only feminist
issue but a human's rights
issue.
And I've been quite struck with
what has happened in the US
with the rising numbers
of babies dying in the US.
The maternal mortality now
sits at 42nd in the world.
For the first time ever
that I can remember,
Amnesty International
has got involved
in the childbirth debate and has
made huge protest around what
is happening in childbirth.
So the human rights sort
of revolution is starting.
The feminists need to
wake up and get mad.
I think it's time we
burnt our bras again,
and we need to make
strong statements,
and we need to reclaim
motherhood for the power
that it can give
women and the rights
for us to control our
bodies in regards to this.
The argument from the feminists
around pain relief is often,
will women have the
right not to feel pain?
They do.
They absolutely
do, and we've never
lived in a better time
for that to happen.
However, women
also have the right
to know the consequences
of pain relief
not only for themselves
but for their babies.
Women also have
the right to have
great support and
empowerment and alternative
ways of handling their pain so
that when they do need the pain
relief because something's
going wrong, it is effective
and it is appropriate.
So it isn't so much saying women
shouldn't have pain relief,
but what women should
have is support
and the right environment
to facilitate physiology for
as long as that is normal.
When pain is
abnormal, pain relief
is exactly what
women should have.
A famous line from
Saint Augustine
is, "Give me other mothers and
I'll give you another world."
Well, I hate to disagree with a
saint, but I've reframed that.
Give me another world, and
I'll give you other mothers.
It's time to stop blaming women
for the outcomes of motherhood
in the world that we
give them, and it's
time for us to create safe,
trusting, empowered worlds so
that mothers can step
from that experience
and become the
strong mothers that
shape the future of the world.
We see often the
baby as a product,
and we see the mother
as almost this vessel
that just carries the product.
If we do not invest in women,
we have no hope with the product
because the product is
a direct result of how
our women are cared for,
nurtured, empowered,
and they then become the
people who actually produce
and nurture our future society.
So we have got to start
investing in women,
not always blaming
them for when things
go wrong with the baby, which we
often view as the product that
is our focus.
In the past five years,
we've seen the beginnings
of publicly funded
home birth, which
runs out of a hospital system.
So we now have two
options for women, one
privately funded
private home birth
with a private midwife and
the other publicly funded home
birth.
We need both.
And the reason is because women
who choose publicly funded home
birth are women who would have
never before thought of a home
birth because they do like
the system and the security
of the system, but
in their relationship
with their midwives and having
the option there available
from the system, they go,
hey, I might give that a try.
So we have to really
support both ways
because there are women now
experiencing home birth that
never would have before,
and we need to make sure
that women who want
to experience it
with private midwives continue
to be able to access that.